>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, OCTOBER 31:
A RUSSIAN PASSENGER PLANE
CRASHES IN EGYPT, KILLING MORE
THAN 200 PEOPLE ON BOARD.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
DROUGHT-RIDDEN CALIFORNIANS
PREPARE TO TAP INTO A NEW WATER
SUPPLY-- THE OCEAN.
AND, THE INCREASING RATES OF
BREAST CANCER FOR AFRICAN-
AMERICAN WOMEN.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
EGYPTIAN AND RUSSIAN OFFICIALS
SAY THERE ARE NO SURVIVORS AMONG
THE 224 PEOPLE ABOARD A RUSSIAN
AIRLINER THAT CRASHED TODAY IN
EGYPT.
THE CRASH HAPPENED IN EGYPT'S
SINAI PENINSULA.
THE CHARTERED AIRBUS A-321 HAD
DISAPPEARED FROM RADAR 23
MINUTES AFTER TAKING OFF FROM
THE RED SEA RESORT TOWN OF SHARM
EL-SHEIKH.
ALL BUT THREE OF THE 217
PASSENGERS WERE RUSSIAN; SO WAS
THE SEVEN-MEMBER CREW.
THE PLANE BELONGED TO THE
RUSSIAN AIRLINE METROJET AND WAS
HEADED FOR ST. PETERSBURG, WHERE
RELATIVES AND FRIENDS OF THE
PASSENGERS WAITED AT THE
AIRPORT.
TEAMS AT THE CRASH SITE HAVE
RECOVERED REMAINS AND HAVE
RETRIEVED THE PLANE'S BLACK
BOXES CONTAINING THE COCKPIT
VOICE AND FLIGHT DATA RECORDERS.
THE CAUSE OF THE CRASH IS NOT
YET KNOWN, BUT EGYPTIAN
OFFICIALS SAY THE PILOT HAD
REPORTED TECHNICAL PROBLEMS AND
PLANNED AN EMERGENCY LANDING
BEFORE LOSING CONTACT WITH AIR
TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS.
EGYPTIAN AND RUSSIAN OFFICIALS
ARE DISCOUNTING AN ONLINE
STATEMENT BY THE TERRORIST GROUP
THE ISLAMIC STATE, OR ISIS,
CLAIMING RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
CRASH, "IN RESPONSE TO RUSSIAN
AIRSTRIKES THAT KILLED HUNDREDS
OF MUSLIMS ON SYRIAN LAND."
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY IS DEFENDING PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S DECISION TO DEPLOY
SEVERAL DOZEN GROUND TROOPS TO
SYRIA FOR THE FIRST TIME.
TRAVELING OVERSEAS TODAY, KERRY
SAID THE SPECIAL OPERATIONS
FORCES WILL NOT TARGET FORCES
LOYAL TO SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR
AL-ASSAD BUT WILL ASSIST SYRIAN
REBELS FIGHTING ISIS, WHICH HE
REFERRED TO BY ITS ARABIC NAME,
DAESH.
>> IT IS NOT A DECISION TO ENTER
INTO SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR.
IT IS NOT AN ACTION OR A CHOICE
FOCUSED ON ASSAD.
IT IS FOCUSED EXCLUSIVELY ON
DAESH AND ON AUGMENTING OUR
ABILITY TO BE ABLE TO MORE
RAPIDLY ATTACK DAESH.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, THE U.S.
PLEDGED ANOTHER $100 MILLION
AID SYRIAN REBELS, BRINGING THE
TOTAL TO
$500 MILLION SINCE 2012.
IN ROMANIA'S CAPITAL OF
BUCHAREST, 27 PEOPLE DIED LAST
NIGHT IN A MUSIC CLUB FIRE.
THE VICTIMS DIED AFTER A ROCK
MUSIC BAND'S FIREWORKS DISPLAY
INSIDE THE BASEMENT CLUB SPARKED
A FIRE AND HEAVY SMOKE.
MORE THAN 180 PEOPLE WERE
INJURED AS THE CROWD STAMPEDED
FOR THE ONE AVAILABLE EXIT.
ALREADY A CANDLELIGHT MEMORIAL
TO THE VICTIMS HAS SPRUNG UP
OUTSIDE THE CLUB.
EVEN ROMANIA'S PRESIDENT HAS
LAID FLOWERS THERE, INSPECTED
THE CLUB, AND DECLARED THREE
DAYS OF MOURNING.
IN THE U.S., THE EARLY RELEASE
OF MORE THAN 6,000 FEDERAL
PRISON INMATES IS NEARING
COMPLETION THIS WEEKEND.
MOST WERE INCARCERATED FOR
NONVIOLENT DRUG OFFENSES, AND,
ON AVERAGE, THEIR SENTENCES WERE
SHORTENED BY TWO YEARS.
NEW GUIDELINES DESIGNED TO LOWER
THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION
AND COSTS WERE SET LAST YEAR BY
THE INDEPENDENT U.S. SENTENCING
COMMISSION.
AT FIRST, A MAJORITY OF THE
RELEASED INMATES WILL LIVE IN
HALFWAY HOUSES OR HOME
CONFINEMENT.
ABOUT 1,700 FORMER INMATES ARE
FOREIGN NATIONALS WHO NOW FACE
DEPORTATION.
IN THE NEXT 12 MONTHS, ANOTHER
8,500 FEDERAL PRISONERS WILL BE
ELIGIBLE FOR SENTENCE
REDUCTIONS; JUDGES ARE APPROVING
ABOUT 75% OF THE REQUESTS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT MONTH IN
DROUGHT-WEARY CALIFORNIA, SAN
DIEGO COUNTY IS EXPECTED TO
START SUPPLYING ITSELF WITH
MILLIONS OF GALLONS A DAY OF
DRINKABLE WATER.
THE SOURCE?
SALTWATER FROM THE PACIFIC OCEAN
CONVERTED TO FRESH WATER BY A
NEW DESALINATION PLANT.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE LOOK AT THIS QUESTION: IS
DESALINATION THE FUTURE FOR
CALIFORNIA'S WATER NEEDS?
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MIKE TAIBBI HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: ON THE SURFACE, SAN
DIEGO DOESN'T SCREAM "WATER
CRISIS."
KIDS STILL SPLASH IN PUBLIC
FOUNTAINS, AND THE LAWNS HAVEN'T
ALL BEEN CONVERTED TO SAND AND
SUCCULENTS.
BUT THE WATER STORY BELOW THE
SURFACE IS HISTORICALLY GRIM.
FOUR YEARS OF ALMOST NO RAIN,
RECORD LOW SNOWPACK FROM THE
SIERRA NEVADA MOUNTAINS, AND
RECORD HIGH TEMPERATURES ARE
CAUSING THE WORST DROUGHT SINCE
THE STATE HAS KEPT WEATHER
RECORDS.
CALIFORNIA HAS IMPOSED
CONSERVATION MEASURES REQUIRING
A 25% REDUCTION IN WATER USAGE.
EVEN THE STATE'S BIGGEST
DRINKERS, THE AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCERS WHO CONSUME 80% OF THE
STATE'S WATER, ARE BEING FORCED
TO CUT BACK.
NOW, THE STATE'S SECOND MOST
POPULOUS COUNTY, SAN DIEGO
COUNTY, IS BETTING ON THE
LARGEST DESALINATION PLANT IN
THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE TO BOOST
ITS WATER SUPPLY.
SO THIS IS IT, THIS IS WHERE THE
MAGIC HAPPENS?
>> THE DESALINATION PROCESS THAT
WE HAVE RUNNING BEHIND US HERE
IS THE MOST EFFICIENT
DESALINATION TECHNOLOGY ANYWHERE
IN NORTH AMERICA.
>> Reporter: PETER MACLAGGAN IS
A SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF
POSEIDON WATER, WHICH WILL
OPERATE THE PLANT IN CARLSBAD,
JUST NORTH OF SAN DIEGO.
POSEIDON SPENT $1 BILLION AND
TOOK NEARLY THREE YEARS TO BUILD
IT.
>> THIS FACILITY WILL CREATE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO LEARN WHAT LARGE-
SCALE DESALINATION CAN MEAN TO
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA AND THE REST
OF THE STATE, FOR THAT MATTER.
WE'VE GOT THE LARGEST RESERVOIR
IN THE WORLD HERE AT OUR
DOORSTEP.
>> Reporter: THAT RESERVOIR IS
THE PACIFIC OCEAN, COVERING
A THIRD OF THE PLANET'S SURFACE
WITH SALTWATER.
OF COURSE, CONVERTING SALTWATER
TO FRESHWATER IS NOT EXACTLY A
NEW IDEA: GREEK SAILORS DID THAT
WITH CRUDE EVAPORATION
TECHNIQUES BACK IN THE
4th CENTURY BC.
TODAY, AT LEAST 120 COUNTRIES
USE DESALINATION, OR "DESAL," AS
IT'S COMMONLY CALLED.
SAUDI ARABIA RELIES ON
DESALINATION FOR 70% OF ITS
WATER NEEDS AND POSEIDON WATER
SEES ITSELF STARTING A TREND IN
THE U.S. HERE IN SAN DIEGO, OUT
OF NECESSITY.
>> WE GET 85% OF OUR WATER COMES
FROM HUNDREDS OF MILES AWAY.
THAT WATER'S UNDER INTENSE
COMPETITION, INTERSTATE
COMPETITION, COMPETITION BETWEEN
FARMERS AND URBAN SETTINGS.
SO IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, THIS
WILL NOT BE THE LAST
DESALINATION PLANT THAT GETS
BUILT, THERE'LL BE OTHERS THAT
FOLLOW.
>> Reporter: HERE'S HOW STATE-
OF-THE-ART DESALINATION PROCESS
WORKS: THE PLANT DRAWS SALTWATER
THROUGH OCEAN INTAKE PIPES WITH
SCREENS TO KEEP OUT MARINE
ORGANISMS.
SAND AND CHEMICAL FILTERS
FURTHER CLEAN THE SEAWATER,
WHICH IS PUSHED THROUGH
THOUSANDS OF TUBES, EACH WITH
FILTERS SO FINE THAT WATER CAN
GET THROUGH, BUT THE LARGER SALT
PARTICLES CANNOT.
IT'S A TECHNOLOGY KNOWN AS
"REVERSE OSMOSIS."
THIS VERSION OF THE PROCESS USES
HALF AS MUCH ENERGY AS IT DID
20 YEARS AGO, WHILE ALSO PUMPING
OUT A HIGHER VOLUME OF WATER.
THE CAPTURED SALT IS DILUTED
WITH THE COOLING WATER FROM THE
NEIGHBORING POWER STATION, AND
THAT'S DISCHARGED BACK INTO THE
OCEAN.
FRESH WATER IS WHAT REMAINS.
THE LAST STEP: THESE EIGHT HIGH-
POWERED PUMPS START SHOVING
50 MILLION GALLONS OF FRESH
WATER A DAY THROUGH THESE BIG
PIPES, UP THE HILL AND STRAIGHT
IN TO THE AQUEDUCT THAT SERVES
112,000 HOMES, SOME 300,000
PEOPLE, ABOUT A TENTH THE
POPULATION OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY.
SAN DIEGO COUNTY HAS COMMITTED
TO BUYING WATER FROM THIS PLANT
FOR THE NEXT 30 YEARS.
THAT WILL INCREASE MONTHLY WATER
BILLS FOR RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESSES BY ABOUT 6%,
SAYS BOB YAMADA OF THE SAN DIEGO
COUNTY WATER AUTHORITY.
>> THE COST TO THE AVERAGE RATE
PAYER, LET'S SAY THE AVERAGE
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER, IS GOING
TO BE ABOUT $5 A MONTH, IN TERMS
OF THEIR INDIVIDUAL COST TO PAY
FOR THE WATER SUPPLY COMING FROM
THIS FACILITY.
>> Reporter: THE WATER
AUTHORITY'S OWN POLL OF A-
THOUSAND SAN DIEGO RESIDENTS
LAST YEAR SHOWED OVERWHELMING
SUPPORT FOR WHAT IT CALLED A
"DIVERSIFIED WATER STRATEGY" TO
INCLUDE DESALINATION.
AND FOR AROUND $5 A MONTH PER
FAMILY TO RE-MEDIATE THE EFFECTS
OF THE DROUGHT, CARLSBAD COULD
BE THE BELLWETHER.
MORE THAN A DOZEN OTHER
DESALINATION PLANTS ARE NOW IN
THE PLANNING STAGES UP AND DOWN
THE CALIFORNIA COAST.
ALL OF THEM CALL FOR THE
MODERNIZED "REVERSE OSMOSIS"
DESIGN THAT POSEIDON IS USING
HERE.
EARLIER THIS YEAR, NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND VISITED A PLANT IN
ISRAEL THAT IS USING THE SAME
TECHNOLOGY THAT NOW PROVIDES
NEARLY HALF THAT COUNTRY'S
DRINKING WATER.
>> WE'RE ABLE TO PRODUCE UP TO
54 MILLION GALLONS A DAY OF
DESALINATED OCEAN WATER.
THAT'S ENOUGH TO FILL AN
OLYMPIC-SIZED POOL EVERY
18 MINUTES.
>> Reporter: THAT ALL SOUNDS
GOOD, A DROUGHT-PROOF SUPPLY OF
FRESH WATER.
BUT CRITICS SAY THERE ARE STILL
QUESTIONS ABOUT DESAL, AND THE
BANDWAGON IS FILLING UP WAY TOO
FAST.
AMONG THOSE CRITICS IS
MATT O'MALLEY OF THE CALIFORNIA
COASTKEEPER ALLIANCE, WHICH
FILED ONE OF SEVERAL LAWSUITS
THAT TRIED AND FAILED TO DELAY
CONSTRUCTION OF THE PLANT.
HE SAYS THE CARLSBAD PLANT WILL
GENERATE GREENHOUSE GASES THAT
COULD CONTRIBUTE TO MORE
FREQUENT DROUGHTS.
>> WE'RE SORT OF STICKING
OURSELVES IN THIS CYCLE.
YOU CAN'T REALLY DESAL YOURSELF
OUT OF A DROUGHT, BECAUSE WHAT
YOU'RE DOING IS PARTLY
CONTRIBUTING TO THE EXACERBATION
OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND TO
DROUGHTS LONG-TERM.
>> Reporter: EVEN WITH ITS
EFFICIENT DESIGN, THE PLANT WILL
BURN THROUGH 840 MEGAWATTS OF
POWER PER DAY-- ABOUT THE SAME
AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY USED TO
POWER NEARLY 30,000 HOMES.
THEN THERE ARE OTHER
ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS,
SUCH AS, WHAT ARE THE LONG-TERM
EFFECTS OF DUMPING ALL THAT
CONCENTRATED SALT BACK IN THE
OCEAN?
POSEIDON SAYS THAT WON'T HURT
MARINE LIFE, AND IT WILL BE
MONITORING THE SALINITY LEVELS
AROUND THE PLANT.
>> ALL THE SCIENCE SUPPORTS THE
FACT THAT WE CAN DO THIS WITHOUT
HARMING THE ENVIRONMENT.
>> Reporter: CALIFORNIA'S
COASTAL COMMISSION SIGNED OFF ON
THIS PROJECT AFTER A SIX-YEAR
PERMITTING PROCESS, BUT HAS
REQUIRED POSEIDON TO IMPLEMENT
MITIGATION MEASURES, LIKE
RESTORING LOCAL WETLANDS.
AND THE STATE HAS ENACTED NEW
GUIDELINES FOR FUTURE
DESALINATION PLANTS, WHICH
INCLUDE PLACING INTAKE VALVES
FULLY UNDERWATER TO REDUCE RISKS
TO MARINE LIFE.
JAY FAMIGLIETTI, A SENIOR WATER
SCIENTIST FOR NASA'S JET
PROPULSION LABORATORY, WHICH
USES ITS TECHNOLOGY TO STUDY
EARTH'S WATER SUPPLY, SAYS THERE
HASN'T BEEN ENOUGH RESEARCH ON
DESAL'S LONG-TERM IMPACTS.
>> I'M WORRIED ONLY BECAUSE OF
THE UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACTS.
THE UNQUANTIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL
LET'S DO THE WORK.
LET'S DO THE WORK AND FIGURE OUT
WHAT THE ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSEQUENCES ARE, AND IF THEY
ARE ACCEPTABLE, GREAT.
BUT WE HAVEN'T DONE THAT WORK.
>> Reporter: THE COUNTRY'S GOING
TO SAY, "WE CAN'T AFFORD TO
WAIT."
>> I BET WE CAN AFFORD TO WAIT,
AND THE WAY WE AFFORD IT IS BY
MORE CONSERVATION AND
EFFICIENCY.
>> WE STILL HAVE COMMUNITIES IN
SAN DIEGO THAT ARE USING PER
CAPITA OVER 350 GALLONS A DAY.
>> Reporter: ENVIRONMENTALIST
O'MALLEY AGREES THE COUNTY
SHOULD PROMOTE MORE WATER
CONSERVATION, CAPTURE STORM
WATER, AND RECYCLE WASTEWATER,
INCLUDING FROM TOILET TO TAP.
>> IT'S THE GENERAL REDUCE,
REUSE, RECYCLE MANTRA, AND IT
APPLIES TO WATER AS WELL.
IT'S HARD FOR ME TO SAY THAT WE
SHOULD BE INVESTING ALL THIS
MONEY AND THE ASSOCIATED
ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS WHEN WE ARE
STILL USING WATER IN SOME PLACES
IN OUR COMMUNITY AT OBSCENE
RATES.
>> Reporter: BUT THE QUESTION
REMAINS: CAN THE DROUGHT ZONE
AFFORD TO WAIT?
CALIFORNIA HAS STRUGGLED WITH
DROUGHT AND LIMITED WATER SUPPLY
THROUGHOUT ITS WHOLE HISTORY.
EVEN WITH A FORECAST FOR A WET
WINTER, THANKS TO EL NINO, THE
NASA WATER SCIENTIST SAYS THE
CURRENT WATER SHORTAGE NUMBERS
DON'T LIE.
>> IT WILL TAKE ABOUT 12
TRILLION GALLONS OF WATER IN
STORAGE IN OUR RESERVOIRS AND
SNOWPACK, IN OUR GROUNDWATER, TO
GET US OUT OF THE DROUGHT.
THAT'S GOING TO TAKE ABOUT FOUR
YEARS OF ABOVE AVERAGE
PRECIPITATION, SO NOT ONE EL
NINO, NOT TWO, BUT THREE OR FOUR
ABOVE AVERAGE YEARS OF
PRECIPITATION.
>> Reporter: DESALINATION MIGHT
HELP MAKE UP THAT DEFICIT.
IT PROVIDES A MORE EXPENSIVE AND
ENERGY INTENSIVE SOURCE OF FRESH
WATER, BUT IT'S ALSO THE MORE
RELIABLE ONE.
EVEN A DROUGHT CANNOT DRY OUT
THE PACIFIC.
THAT'S WHY UP THE COAST, IN
SANTA BARBARA, ANOTHER
DESALINATION PLANT COULD BE
RUNNING NEXT YEAR.
THE CITY BUILT ONE BACK IN 1992
IN THE MIDDLE OF A FIVE-YEAR
DROUGHT, AT THE TIME, ONE OF THE
STATE'S MOST SEVERE.
BUT THEN THE RAINS CAME-- A LOT
OF RAIN-- AND, JUST FOUR MONTHS
AFTER THE PLANT STARTED RUNNING,
THE CITY SHUT IT OFF TO SAVE
MONEY.
NOW, SANTA BARBARA IS SPENDING
$55 MILLION TO KNOCK DOWN THE
EXISTING PUMPS AND FILTERS TO
TURN THIS INTO A MODERN
DESALINATION OPERATION.
HELENE SCHNEIDER IS THE MAYOR.
>> THIS DROUGHT WILL END ONE
DAY, THERE IS GOING TO BE
ANOTHER DROUGHT IN THE FUTURE.
WE DON'T WANT TO BE PUT IN THE
SITUATION OF GOING THROUGH A
PANICKY SESSION OF GETTING
PERMITS UP TO DATE OR GETTING
THINGS MOVING.
WE WANT TO HAVE DESAL AS AN
OPTION WHEN WE NEED IT.
>> Reporter: WHAT HAPPENS IF THE
RAINS COME THIS TIME, AND THEY
COME IN EL NINO PROPORTIONS, IN
THAT MAGNITUDE?
IS THERE GOING TO BE SOME HAND
WRINGING, SAYING, "DID WE SCREW
UP AGAIN HERE?"
>> WE'RE DOING THE BEST WE CAN
WITH THE INFORMATION WE HAVE AT
THE TIME WE HAVE IT.
AND I'VE SAID MANY TIMES, I'VE
BEEN CALLING MOTHER NATURE,
SHE'S NOT RETURNING MY PHONE
CALLS.
>> Reporter: MAYOR SCHNEIDER
KNOWS CALIFORNIA'S WATER CRISIS
WON'T BE SOLVED BY DESALINATION.
IT WILL AT BEST BE A PARTIAL
SOLUTION, SUPPLYING AN IMPORTANT
THOUGH LIMITED AMOUNT OF THE
POPULATION'S WATER NEEDS: ABOUT
30% OF DEMAND IN SANTA BARBARA
AND ABOUT 10% IN SAN DIEGO.
BUT POSEIDON'S PETER MACLAGGAN
BELIEVES DESALINATION IS A GAME
CHANGER AND "ANOTHER TOOL IN THE
TOOLBOX" COME RAIN OR COME
SHINE.
>> IT CAN RAIN BUCKETS ALL
WINTER LONG, AND THAT WILL BE A
GREAT THING, BUT IT'S NOT GOING
TO ELIMINATE THE NEED FOR THIS
FACILITY.
>> Reporter: BUT AS CALIFORNIA
CONSIDERS MORE AND MORE
DESALINATION OPTIONS, IT WILL
HAVE TO WEIGH THE COSTS AND
BENEFITS OF TURNING TO THIS
GREAT RESERVOIR JUST OFF ITS
COAST.
>> Sreenivasan: DAYLIGHT SAVINGS
TIME ENDS TOMORROW MORNING, BUT
THAT DOESN'T MEAN YOU SHOULD
SPEND YOUR EXTRA HOUR SLEEPING
IN.
FIND OUT WHY AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEW REPORT
FROM THE AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY
FINDS BREAST CANCER IS NOW AS
COMMON AMONG BLACK WOMEN IN THE
U.S. AS IT IS AMONG WHITE WOMEN.
THE DATA PUBLISHED THIS WEEK
SHOWS THE RATE OF BREAST CANCER
AMONG AFRICAN-AMERICANS HAD
RANGED FROM 119 TO 125 OUT OF
EVERY 100,000 WOMEN, BUT IN
2012, THAT RATE WENT UP TO 135
OUT OF EVERY 100,000 BLACK
WOMEN, MATCHING THE RATE OF
WHITE WOMEN.
THAT NUMBER IS TROUBLING IN PART
BECAUSE BREAST CANCER IS MORE
FATAL FOR BLACK WOMEN THAN WHITE
WOMEN: THEY ARE 42% MORE LIKELY
TO DIE FROM THE DISEASE.
JOINING ME NOW FROM ATLANTA
DISCUSS THIS REPORT IS DOCTOR
OTIS BRAWLEY.
HE'S THE CHIEF MEDICAL AND
SCIENTIFIC OFFICER OF THE
AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY.
YOU LOOK AT THESE NUMBERS AND
WHAT I AM A LITTLE CONCERNED
ABOUT IS, IF THAT RATE WAS ABLE
TO CATCH UP DOES THAT MEAN IT IS
ON A BAD TRAJECTORY AND COULD
EVEN GET WORSE?
>> I BELIEVE IT WILL GET WORSE,
AND WE NEED TO ADDRESS IT NOW TO
PREVENT IT FROM GETTING WORSE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT IS IT
THAT ACTUALLY CAUGHT THIS
POPULATION UP? WHAT IS IT IN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMEN THAT
MAKES THEM MORE LIKELY TO DIE
FROM A DIAGNOSIS OR AFTER A
DIAGNOSIS OF BREAST CANCER THAN
WHITE WOMEN?
>> A COUPLE OF FACTORS THAT
ACTUALLY INCREASE RISK FOR
BREAST CANCER AND THEY ARE
WORKING VERY HARD AND
UNFORTUNATELY VERY EFFECTIVELY
IN THE BLACK POPULATION.
OBESITY CAUSES BREAST CANCER.
BLACK WOMEN HAVE GONE FROM
15 PERCENT OF ADULT BLACK WOMEN
BEING OBESE IN THE 1970'S TO NOW
OVER 60 PERCENT TODAY.
DIETS THAT ARE LOW IN FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES CAUSE BREAST CANCER,
AND UNFORTUNATELY, WE HAVE A
NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE BAD
DIETS.
NOT BREAST-FEEDING ACTUALLY
INCREASES RISK FOR BREAST CANCER
AND THAT IS A PROBLEM AS WELL IN
THE BLACK POPULATION.
WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH WOMEN WHO
ARE BREAST-FEEDING WHEN THEY
HAVE A CHILD.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THIS IS A
CASE OF INCREASED DIAGNOSED?
>> YES.
THIS IS NOT A CASE OF THEY HAVE
ALWAYS HAD IT AND WE ARE NOW
STARTING TO FIND IT. THIS IS A
CASE OF, THEY ARE STARTING TO
HAVE IT IN GREATER AND GREATER
NUMBERS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
ACCESS PART OF THE EQUATION?
SAY, FOR EXAMPLE, FOR MAMMOGRAMS
AND SCREENINGS?
>> YES.
WELL, MAMMOGRAPHY RATES
BETWEEN RATES BETWEEN BLACKS AND
WHITES ARE SIMILAR BUT THE DATA
SHOWS BLACK WOMEN AND I WOULD
ADD TO THAT POOR WHITE WOMEN ARE
LESS LIKELY TO GET HIGH QUALITY
MAMMOGRAPHY, ONCE
DIAGNOSED WITH ABNORMALITY THEY
ARE LESS LIKELY TO GET HIGH
QUALITY DIAGNOSTICS AND VERY
IMPORTANTLY, WHEN THAT GOOD DATA
SHOWS THAT BLACK WOMEN AND POOR
WHITE WOMEN AND POOR OTHER
MINORITIES AS WELL ARE LESS
LIKELY TO GET GOOD TREATMENT,
AND SOME OF THE DISPARITY .. IN
MORTALITY WE SEE AMONGST BLACKS
AND WHITES IS ACTUALLY DUE TO
DISPARITIES IN QUALITY OF
TREATMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY.
SO WHAT DO YOU DO ABOUT THIS?
HOW DO YOU GET THE CANCER RATE
DOWN FOR ALL WOMEN, BUT
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU SEE THIS
PROBLEM IN COMMUNITIES OF COLOR?
>> MY MESSAGE IS A MESSAGE FOR
ALL WOMEN, NOT JUST WOMEN OF
COLOR AND THAT IS TRY TO
MAINTAIN AN IDEAL BODY WEIGHT,
TRY TO GET GOOD EXERCISE, TRY TO
HAVE A DIET THAT IS HIGH IN
FRUITS AND VEGETABLES, TRY TO
DECREASE MEAT CONSUMPTION, IF
YOU HAVE A CHILD, TRY TO
BREAST-FEED.
IF DIAGNOSED WITH BREAST
CANCER,,
YOU NEED TO SEEK THE HIGHEST,
BEST QUALITY CARE THAT WE CAN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
DR. OTIS FITS FROM THE AMERICAN
CANCER SOCIETY, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK MARKS
THREE YEARS SINCE HURRICANE
SANDY STRUCK THE NORTHEASTERN
UNITED STATES.
THERE WERE MORE THAN 100 DEATHS,
AND CAUSED $50 BILLION IN
PROPERTY DAMAGE.
IN ONE BOROUGH OF NEW YORK CITY,
STATEN ISLAND, 24 PEOPLE DIED
FROM THE STORM, AND MORE THAN
2,100 HOMES SUFFERED MAJOR
DAMAGE OR WERE DESTROYED.
WHILE MANY COASTAL RESIDENTS
THERE REBUILT, MANY MOVED, BUT
ONLY AFTER THE GOVERNMENT PAID
THEM TO LEAVE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
EXPLAINS.
>> Reporter: TINA AND RANDY
DOWNER BUILT THEIR DREAM HOUSE
AND RAISED THEIR TWO KIDS IN THE
OAKWOOD BEACH SECTION OF STATEN
ISLAND.
THEIR HOUSE WAS JUST 300 FEET
FROM THE ATLANTIC OCEAN.
>> IT'S BEAUTIFUL.
IT'S LIKE WE GOT TO LIVE IN SOME
KIND OF A NATURE SANCTUARY.
>> Reporter: THE DOWNERS KNEW
THE AREA WAS PRONE TO FLOODING
DURING STORMS, BUT THE
DESTRUCTION OF SUPERSTORM SANDY
TOOK THEM BY SURPRISE.
>> I COULD NOT BELIEVE WHAT WE
WERE SEEING.
>> Reporter: THEIR HOUSE TOOK ON
13 FEET OF WATER.
JUST DOWN THE STREET, JOE TIRONE
OWNED A SMALL BUNGALOW THAT HE
RENTED OUT.
AFTER THE DAMAGE FROM SANDY, HE
TOLD A CONSULTANT FOR THE
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AGENCY- OR FEMA- THAT HE
DIDN'T WANT TO REBUILD.
>> HE SAID, "WELL IF THAT'S THE
CASE WHY DON'T YOU HAVE THE
GOVERNMENT BUY OUT YOUR HOME?"
AND I HAD NO IDEA WHAT HE WAS
TALKING ABOUT.
>> Reporter: FOR TWO DECADES,
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
FINANCED THE PURCHASE OF HOMES
IN SEVERELY FLOOD PRONE AREAS
ALL OVER THE COUNTRY, GETTING
HOMEOWNERS PERMANENTLY OUT OF
HARM'S WAY.
THE BUYOUTS ARE ADMINISTERED BY
THE STATES AND LOCAL
MUNICIPALITIES.
WHEN TIRONE LEARNED ABOUT THIS
PROGRAM, HE PRESENTED THE IDEA
TO HIS FELLOW HOMEOWNERS AT A
COMMUNITY MEETING.
>> I SAID, "HOW MANY PEOPLE HERE
WOULD BE INTERESTED IN A
BUYOUT?"
BASICALLY EVERY SINGLE PERSON
RAISED THEIR HAND.
>> Reporter: IN THE THREE YEARS
SINCE SANDY, NEARLY EVERY ONE OF
THE 180 HOMEOWNERS HERE IN
OAKWOOD BEACH HAS TAKEN THE
VOLUNTARY BUYOUT FROM THE STATE.
THAT INCLUDED THE DOWNERS, WHO
NOW FEARED LIVING SO CLOSE TO
THE OCEAN.
THREE OF THEIR NEIGHBORS DIED
DURING SANDY.
>> PEOPLE WE KNOW DIED HERE.
THAT HIT HOME WITH A LOT OF
PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: WHEN NEW YORK
GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO VISITED
OAKWOOD BEACH ON THE SECOND
ANNIVERSARY OF SANDY LAST YEAR,
HE PROMISED EVERY HOUSE BOUGHT
OUT WOULD BE DEMOLISHED, AND
THIS VULNERABLE LAND WOULD NEVER
BE BUILT ON AGAIN.
>> WE'RE GOING TO RETURN THIS
BACK TO THE NATURAL PRISTINE
WETLANDS, SO THAT GOD FORBID
THERE IS ANOTHER STORM, THIS
BECOMES AN EFFECTIVE BUFFER FOR
THE REST OF THE COMMUNITIES.
>> Reporter: HOMEOWNERS WERE
OFFERED THE PRE-SANDY MARKET
VALUE OF THEIR HOMES- PLUS AS
MUCH AS 15% MORE.
OVERALL, THE STATE IS PLANNING
TO SPEND $200 MILLION TO BUYOUT
500 HOMES MOSTLY IN THREE STATEN
ISLAND NEIGHBORHOODS.
LISA BOVA-HIATT OVERSEES NEW
YORK STATE'S RECOVERY PROGRAM
AND SAYS IT WAS NECESSARY FOR
THE STATE TO PAY ABOVE MARKET
VALUE.
>> IF YOU ARE GOING TO GET
PEOPLE TO BUY INTO A "MANAGED
RETREAT" SCENARIO, YOU NEED TO
GIVE THEM INCENTIVE TO LEAVE.
IT'S NOT A WINDFALL FOR THEM.
ANY ADDITIONAL MONEY THAT
THEY'VE RECEIVED FROM INSURANCE
COMPANIES OR FROM FEMA IS
DEDUCTED.
>> Reporter: BOVA-HIATT SAYS
BUYING AND DEMOLISHING HOMES IN
THESE AREAS SAVES TAXPAYER MONEY
IN THE LONG-RUN.
>> WE ARE MAKING SURE THAT WE'RE
NOT SPENDING MONEY ON
INFRASTRUCTURE IN AREAS THAT
WILL REPETITIVELY NEED TO BE
FIXED.
>> Reporter: BUT AREN'T THERE
OTHER PARTS OF STATEN ISLAND
THAT ARE JUST AS PRONE TO
FLOODING WHERE THIS PROGRAM
ISN'T BEING OFFERED?
>> SURE, BUT WE HAVE OTHER
PROGRAMS.
THE REALITY IS THAT THERE'S NO
ONE WAY TO TAKE CARE OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD OR A BOROUGH, OR IN
OUR CASE, A STATE, AFTER A
STORM.
>> Reporter: WHERE THE DOWNER'S
HOUSE STOOD IS NOW AN EMPTY
PLOT.
THEY NOW OWN AND LIVE IN A
ONE-BEDROOM APARTMENT ON THE
FIFTH FLOOR OF A BUILDING
ELSEWHERE ON THE ISLAND.
WITH THE STATE BUYOUT MONEY,
THEY ALSO BOUGHT A SECOND HOME
OUT OF STATE.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO SOMEBODY WHO
SAYS, "SOUNDS LIKE A LOT OF
MONEY."
WAS IT A WINDFALL FOR YOU?
>> NO, I THINK THAT IT WAS VERY
FAIR THAT THE STATE USED THE
PROPER VALUATIONS ON THE
PROPERTY.
IT STILL CAN'T REPLACE WHAT WE
LOST.
THE SENSE OF COMMUNITY, WHERE
ARE ROOTS ARE, OUR FRIENDS AND
NEIGHBORS.
SO IT DIDN'T EVEN MATTER, WE
LOST A LOT.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS A
LITERARY GATHERING LAST NIGHT AT
LONDON'S WHEAT SHEAF PUB, A
REGULAR HANGOUT OF THE LATE POET
DYLAN THOMAS.
THE CROWD WAS THERE TO HEAR A
READING OF A NEWLY DISCOVERED
POEM ENTITLED "A DREAM OF
WINTER," 73 YEARS AFTER THOMAS
WROTE IT.
ITN'S PETER SMITH REPORTS.
>> A WINTER NIGHT, A WINTER
NIGHT SCENE --
>> IT HAS BEEN 62 YEARS SINCE
DYLAN THOMAS DIED BUT HIS WORKS
IN A LONG FORGOTTEN POEM HAVE
JUST BEEN BROUGHT BACK TO LIFE.
BORN 101 YEARS AGO THIS WEEK,
THOMAS IS CONSIDERED THE
GREATEST WELSH POET IF NOT
BRITAIN'S BEST AND ONE OF THE
FEW POETS OF THIS ERA TO BE
RECORDED READING HIS OWN WORK.
>> DO NOT GO GENTLE INTO THAT
GOOD NIGHT.
RAGE, RAGE AGAINST THE DYING OF
THE LIGHT.
>> BUT IT IS A NEW OLD POEM THAT
IS GENERATING EXCITEMENT, "A
DREAM OF WINTER" SLIPPED INTO
OBSCURITY AFTER PUBLICATION IN
1942 IN AN AMERICAN PERIODICAL
THAT WENT OUT OF PRINT.
ITS REDISCOVERY CAME ABOUT BY
COMPLETE ACCIDENT.
>> MY IT WAS IN A MAGAZINE TO
TORE IT OUT FROM A MAGAZINE WHEN
HE WROTE TO ME, WHY HAVEN'T YOU
INCLUDED IT? I DIDN'T HAVE AN
ANSWER.
>> THIS POEM ALSO OFFERS
SOMETHING COMPLETELY UNIQUE, THE
CHANCE TO SEE THE ENERGIES THAT
INSPIRED THE WORDS.
>> TO ME, IT IS SORT OF
PANDORA'S BOX IN HIS MIND'S EYE,
BECAUSE YOU SEE ALL OF THESE
IMAGES, WHICH HE IS DIRECTLY
REFERRING TO.
>> THE FIRST READING WAS IN THE
WHEAT CHIEF IN LONDON WHICH IS
TESTIMONY 79 YEARS ON HE IS
STILL IMPRESSING PEOPLE HERE
WITH HIS POETRY.
>> STAND AT THE LONDON MEANS.
[ APPLAUSE ]
>> AND FINALLY, ONLINE NOW,
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR, EIGHT THINGS
YOU PROBABLY DID NOT KNOW ABOUT
THE OPERATIC ROCK SONG BOHEMIAN
RHAPSODY RELEASED BY QUEEN 40
YEARS AGO TODAY.
ON TOMORROW'S PROGRAM OUR REPORT
FROM GREECE, NUMBER ONE ENTRY
POINT IN EUROPE FOR REFUGEES
FLEEING WARS IN THE MIDDLE EAST
AND A REPORT FROM TURKEY ON THE
CRITICAL NATIONAL ELECTIONS
TAKING PLACE THERE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I AM HARI
SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.